The coronavirus swooped down from space, forcing children on Earth into lockdown and scaring them. Coming to the rescue is Captain Stay Safe. Not only does he tell them exactly what they need to do to outwit the virus, he also helps them find ways to beat the boredom while stuck indoors. The character comes from the fertile imagination and talented drawings of 11-year-old Jan Louwrens, of Paarl in the Western Cape. "Children are worried about the virus and about going back to school. I wanted them to know that they will be looked after," he said. Jan and his mother, Ronelle, work on the comic every evening after his homework. He draws and dictates the story while Ronelle turns his imaginings into a readable format. "I'm really enjoying lockdown," Jan said. "I like that there isn't someone telling me when I need to finish my work. After work I design my robots. I have a new robot who lives on Mars - Marsmellow, he's top-heavy and has two missiles on his wrists." He said he began drawing robots when he was three, but at nine he was frustrated because he didn't like playing sports at school. So when he was approached by the agriculture news website Food for Mzansi to come up with an educational comic strip to teach kids about the virus, he grabbed the opportunity. A new comic is translated into all 11 official languages and uploaded onto the website each week. Food for Mzansi co-founder Ivor Price said they wanted to fully understand children's fears about the pandemic. "It just made sense to team up with Jan, a young robot inventor and cartoonist who has already been making waves in the digital world. He is a gentle giant, and we love that he's also mainstreaming nerdism. Kids often feel out of place in their schools because they are so sport-oriented." Two years ago Jan, who attends Paarl Boys' Primary School, started his own T-shirt company with the help of his parents. Ronelle explained: "He finds it difficult to concentrate at school and doesn't like it much. I thought to give him something to be excited about we would create comics after his work was finished. He was already drawing robots, but he's really interested in the way things fit together. He would draw the robots in pieces and explain how the pieces could create different robots - he calls it his menu or recipe. One day we turned some of his cartoons into T-shirts for family and suddenly everyone wanted one. That's how the business, Baggo Stonetrip, began." The family own a marketing company which helps with the apparel business. Jan draws and his images are then "treated", a process where a designer makes the drawings more precise. Then the image is printed onto clothing. "As he grows up he will do more of the work," Ronelle said. "It's important that he has creative control. As adults we draw from memory - he draws from imagination."