Where's the fun in being a foodie if you can't show off your creations to all your friends, not just the ones invited to dinner? That's why you need a great camera to take those high-res food shots that will rival anything seen on BBC Food, especially in the month when SA celebrates Braai Day. This September, on each of the first three Sundays, we are publishing recipes for three sets of dishes with a South African heritage and inspired by Weber Sauces and Seasonings, paired with delicious cocktails from Fitch & Leedes and compiled by celebrity chef Sandy Wood. Prepare one or more of these dishes at home (see recipes below), take a gorgeous photo and e-mail it to us to stand a chance of winning a Canon EOS RP camera with an RF 25-105mm lens (worth R33,695) or, for each of the two runners-up, a Canon TS5340 printer valued at R999. Send your photographs to competitions@sundaytimes.co.za — include your full name, phone number and address, and the subject line "#STFoodiePhoto”. Click here to read more and view the terms and conditions. Starter Bobotie kebabs Feta and pomegranate rice salad Main Spatchcock chicken with peri-peri sauce OR Whole grilled yellowtail with fennel, cucumber and parsley salad Drinks pairing: Fitch & Leedes rosemary G & Dessert Classic Peppermint Crisp tart Serves: 4 Kebabs: 60ml (¼ cup) fresh breadcrumbs 60ml (4 tbsp) milk 500g lean beef mince ½ onion, finely chopped 1 egg, beaten 30ml (2 tbsp) sultanas, chopped 45ml (3 tbsp) fresh coriander, chopped (stalks and leaves) 1 garlic clove, crushed 5ml (1 tsp) ground turmeric 5ml (1 tsp) ground coriander 2.5ml (½ tsp) fresh grated ginger Coarse salt and freshly ground black pepper, to taste Bamboo kebab sticks Oil Salad: 500g basmati rice, cooked ½ cucumber, finely chopped 125ml (½ cup) pomegranate seeds 100g feta, crumbled 100g flaked almonds, toasted Dressing: Juice of 1 orange A small handful of fresh mint, stalks removed and finely chopped 45ml (3 tbsp) runny honey 2.5ml (½ tsp) ground turmeric 30ml (2 tbsp) cider vinegar 90ml (6 tbsp) olive oil Salt and freshly ground black pepper, to taste Method: Serves: 4 Ingredients: 1 whole chicken, butterflied by cutting through the breast bone and flattened Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste Peri-peri sauce: 2 red peppers, chopped 45ml (3 tbsp) sunflower oil 1 onion, chopped 1 clove of garlic, peeled 4 red chillies 20ml (4 tsp) paprika 10ml (2 tsp) cayenne pepper 7.5ml (1 ½ tsp) Weber Aromatic Rosemary and Garlic seasoning A good grinding of black pepper Juice and zest of 1 lemon 15ml (3 tsp) sugar 5ml (1 tsp) dried basil 80ml (cup) sunflower oil 60ml (4 tbsp) white wine vinegar 45ml (3 tbsp) Worcestershire sauce Method: Make the perfect succulent rotisserie chicken over the grill or in the oven with Weber's traditional blend of onion, garlic, herbs and peppers. You'll never buy another store-cooked bird. Cook's tip: Make the best crispy fried chicken by coating chicken pieces in flour with a generous sprinkling of Weber Rotisserie Chicken Infusion Rub before frying. Weber has combined aromatic rosemary, robust garlic and the finest Kalahari Desert salt in one convenient spice grinder to create a hassle-free seasoning that'll embolden the flavours of grilled chicken, meat and fish, vegetables and stews. Cook's tip: Add some sparkle to a salad by adding a generous grinding of Web Rosemary and Garlic seasoning to your dressing. Serves: 4-6 Ingredients: 1 whole fish (about 1.5kg), scaled, boned and butterflied Coarse salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 1 lemon, sliced Juice of 1 lemon 100g butter Salad: 1 large fennel bulb, thinly sliced ½ large cucumber, peeled and thinly sliced 1 bunch Italian parsley, roughly chopped, leaving a few leaves intact for garnish 30ml (2 tbsp) capers, rinsed, drained and roughly chopped The zest and juice of half a lemon A good splash of olive oil Maldon salt and black pepper, to taste Method: Makes: 1 Ingredients: 50ml gin of your choice 1-2 tsp (5-10 ml) rosemary syrup, or more or less to taste Fitch & Leedes Indian Tonic Garnish: Fresh raspberries Sprig of fresh rosemary Method: Pictured above. Makes: 1 tart Ingredients: 200g Tennis biscuits 60ml (4 tbsp) butter, melted 500ml (2 cups) cream, stiffly whipped 1 x 385g can caramelised condensed milk 200g Peppermint Crisp chocolate, roughly chopped Method: Sandy Wood, the chef behind the delicious recipes featured here, grew up on feasts of Sunday roasts, afternoon teas and candlelit dinners. “My mother was an amazing cook and entertainer and my biggest inspiration. She made an occasion out of every event,” she says. Wood developed her culinary skills at Le Cordon Bleu, as well as other prestigious cookery schools overseas. On home turf and with a wealth of experience under her belt, Wood opened Sandy’s Kitchen, where she combines her skills as caterer, stylist and event planner, offering a one-stop-shop for weddings, corporate events, dinner parties and smaller events. For more info, visit sandyskitchensa.com, e-mail sandys.kitchen@icloud.com or call 082 882 0238.